docs/content/getting-started.md, before:

---
menu:
    main:
        weight: -90
title: Getting Started
---

## Installation

* __From Source__\
If you have Go 1.9 or higher installed and GOPATH environment variable properly set up, you
can download and install `cloudprober` using the following commands:
```
go get github.com/google/cloudprober
GOBIN=$GOPATH/bin go install $GOPATH/src/github.com/google/cloudprober/cmd/cloudprober.go
```

* __Pre-built Binaries__\
You can download the pre-built binaries for Linux, Mac OS and Windows from the
project's [releases page](http://github.com/google/cloudprober/releases).

* __Docker Image__\
You can download and run the latest docker image using the following command:
```
docker run --net host cloudprober/cloudprober
# Note: --net host provides better network performance and makes port forwarding
# management easier.
```

## Configuration
Without any config, cloudprober will run only the "sysvars" module (no probes)
and write metrics to stdout in cloudprober's line protocol format (to be
documented). It will also start a [Prometheus](http://prometheus.io) exporter
at: http://localhost:9313 (you can change the default port through the
environment variable CLOUDPROBER_PORT).

Since sysvars variables are not very interesting themselves, lets add a simple
config that probes Google's homepage:

```shell
# Write config to a file in /tmp
cat > /tmp/cloudprober.cfg <<EOF
probe {
  name: "google_homepage"
  type: HTTP
  targets {
    host_names: "www.google.com"
  }
  interval_msec: 5000  # 5s
  timeout_msec: 1000   # 1s
}
EOF
```

This config adds an HTTP probe that accesses the homepage of the target
"www.google.com" every 5s with a timeout of 1s. Cloudprober configuration is
specified in the text protobuf format, with config schema described by the
proto file: [config.proto
](https://github.com/google/cloudprober/blob/master/config/proto/config.proto).

Assuming that you saved this file at `/tmp/cloudprober.cfg` (following the
command above), you can have cloudprober use this config file using the following command line:

```shell
./cloudprober --config_file /tmp/cloudprober.cfg
```

You can have the standard docker image use this config using the following
command:
```
docker run --net host -v /tmp/cloudprober.cfg:/etc/cloudprober.cfg \
    cloudprober/cloudprober
```

_While running on GCE, the entire config can also be passed through the custom
metadata attribute cloudprober\_config_.

You'll see probe metrics at the URL: http://hostname:9313/metrics and at
stdout:

```
cloudprober 1500590430132947313 1500590520 labels=ptype=http,probe=google-http,dst=www.google.com total=17 success=17 latency=1808357 timeouts=0 resp-code=map:code,200:17
cloudprober 1500590430132947314 1500590530 labels=ptype=sysvars,probe=sysvars hostname="manugarg-workstation" uptime=100
cloudprober 1500590430132947315 1500590530 labels=ptype=http,probe=google-http,dst=www.google.com total=19 success=19 latency=2116441 timeouts=0 resp-code=map:code,200:19
```

This information is good for debugging monitoring issues, but to really make
sense of this data, you'll need to feed this data to another monitoring system
like StackDriver or Prometheus. Lets set up a Prometheus and Grafana stack to
make pretty graphs for us.

## Running Prometheus

Download prometheus binary from its [release page](https://prometheus.io/download/). You can use a config like the following
to scrape cloudprober running on the same host.

```shell
# Write config to a file in /tmp
cat > /tmp/prometheus.yml <<EOF
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'cloudprober'
    scrape_interval: 10s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9313']
EOF

Start prometheus:
./prometheus --config.file=/tmp/prometheus.yml
```

Prometheus provides a web interface at http://localhost:9090. You can explore
the probe metrics and build useful graphs through this interface. All probes
in cloudprober export at least 3 counters:

*   _total_: Total number of probes.
*   _success_: Number of successful probes. Difference between _total_ and
			   _success_ indicates failures.
*   _latency_: Total (cumulative) probe latency.

Using these counters, probe failure ratio and average latency can be calculated
as:
```
failure_ratio = (rate(total) - rate(success)) / rate(total)
avg_latency = rate(latency) / rate(success)
```

Assuming that prometheus is running at `localhost:9090`, graphs depicting
failure ratio and latency over time can be accessed in prometheus at: [this url ](http://localhost:9090/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=(rate(total%5B1m%5D)+-+rate(success%5B1m%5D))+%2F+rate(total%5B1m%5D)&g0.tab=0&g1.range_input=1h&g1.expr=rate(latency%5B1m%5D)+%2F+rate(success%5B1m%5D)+%2F+1000&g1.tab=0).
Even though prometheus provides a graphing interface, Grafana provides much
richer interface and has excellent support for prometheus.

## Grafana

[Grafana](https://grafana.com) is a popular tool for building monitoring
dashboards. Grafana has native support for prometheus and thanks to the 
excellent support for prometheus in Cloudprober itself, it's a breeze to build
Grafana dashboards from Cloudprober's probe results.

To get started with Grafana, follow the Grafana-Prometheus
[integration guide](https://prometheus.io/docs/visualization/grafana/).

Commit message:

Add verification section to getting-started
Document the "/config" and "/status" URLs in the verification section in "Getting Started".

docs/content/getting-started.md, after:

---
menu:
    main:
        weight: -90
title: Getting Started
---

## Installation

* __From Source__\
If you have Go 1.9 or higher installed and GOPATH environment variable properly set up, you
can download and install `cloudprober` using the following commands:
```shell
go get github.com/google/cloudprober
GOBIN=$GOPATH/bin go install $GOPATH/src/github.com/google/cloudprober/cmd/cloudprober.go
```

* __Pre-built Binaries__\
You can download the pre-built binaries for Linux, Mac OS and Windows from the
project's [releases page](http://github.com/google/cloudprober/releases).

* __Docker Image__\
You can download and run the latest docker image using the following command:
```shell
docker run --net host cloudprober/cloudprober
# Note: --net host provides better network performance and makes port forwarding
# management easier.
```

## Configuration
Without any config, cloudprober will run only the "sysvars" module (no probes)
and write metrics to stdout in cloudprober's line protocol format (to be
documented). It will also start a [Prometheus](http://prometheus.io) exporter
at: http://localhost:9313 (you can change the default port through the
environment variable _CLOUDPROBER_PORT_).

Since sysvars variables are not very interesting themselves, lets add a simple
config that probes Google's homepage:

```shell
# Write config to a file in /tmp
cat > /tmp/cloudprober.cfg <<EOF
probe {
  name: "google_homepage"
  type: HTTP
  targets {
    host_names: "www.google.com"
  }
  interval_msec: 5000  # 5s
  timeout_msec: 1000   # 1s
}
EOF
```

This config adds an HTTP probe that accesses the homepage of the target
"www.google.com" every 5s with a timeout of 1s. Cloudprober configuration is
specified in the text protobuf format, with config schema described by the
proto file: [config.proto
](https://github.com/google/cloudprober/blob/master/config/proto/config.proto).

Assuming that you saved this file at `/tmp/cloudprober.cfg` (following the
command above), you can have cloudprober use this config file using the following command line:

```shell
./cloudprober --config_file /tmp/cloudprober.cfg
```

You can have the standard docker image use this config using the following
command:
```
docker run --net host -v /tmp/cloudprober.cfg:/etc/cloudprober.cfg \
    cloudprober/cloudprober
```

_Note: While running on GCE, cloudprober config can also be provided through a
custom metadata attribute: cloudprober\_config_.

## Verification

One quick way to verify that cloudprober got the correct config, is to access
the URL http://localhost:9313/config (through cURL or in browser). It returns
the config that cloudprober is using. You can also get a peek its current
status at the URL (_replace localhost by the actual hostname if not running
locally_): http://localhost:9313/status.

You should be able to see the generated metrics at http://locahost:9313/metrics
(prometheus format) and the stdout (cloudprober format):

```
cloudprober 1500590430132947313 1500590520 labels=ptype=http,probe=google-http,dst=www.google.com total=17 success=17 latency=1808357 timeouts=0 resp-code=map:code,200:17
cloudprober 1500590430132947314 1500590530 labels=ptype=sysvars,probe=sysvars hostname="manugarg-workstation" uptime=100
cloudprober 1500590430132947315 1500590530 labels=ptype=http,probe=google-http,dst=www.google.com total=19 success=19 latency=2116441 timeouts=0 resp-code=map:code,200:19
```

This information is good for debugging monitoring issues, but to really make
sense of this data, you'll need to feed this data to another monitoring system
like _Prometheus_ or _StackDriver_. Lets set up a Prometheus and Grafana stack
to make pretty graphs for us.

## Running Prometheus

Download prometheus binary from its [release page](https://prometheus.io/download/). You can use a config like the following
to scrape cloudprober running on the same host.

```shell
# Write config to a file in /tmp
cat > /tmp/prometheus.yml <<EOF
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'cloudprober'
    scrape_interval: 10s
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9313']
EOF

Start prometheus:
./prometheus --config.file=/tmp/prometheus.yml
```

Prometheus provides a web interface at http://localhost:9090. You can explore
the probe metrics and build useful graphs through this interface. All probes
in cloudprober export at least 3 counters:

*   _total_: Total number of probes.
*   _success_: Number of successful probes. Difference between _total_ and
			   _success_ indicates failures.
*   _latency_: Total (cumulative) probe latency.

Using these counters, probe failure ratio and average latency can be calculated
as:
```
failure_ratio = (rate(total) - rate(success)) / rate(total)
avg_latency = rate(latency) / rate(success)
```

Assuming that prometheus is running at `localhost:9090`, graphs depicting
failure ratio and latency over time can be accessed in prometheus at: [this url ](http://localhost:9090/graph?g0.range_input=1h&g0.expr=(rate(total%5B1m%5D)+-+rate(success%5B1m%5D))+%2F+rate(total%5B1m%5D)&g0.tab=0&g1.range_input=1h&g1.expr=rate(latency%5B1m%5D)+%2F+rate(success%5B1m%5D)+%2F+1000&g1.tab=0).
Even though prometheus provides a graphing interface, Grafana provides much
richer interface and has excellent support for prometheus.

## Grafana

[Grafana](https://grafana.com) is a popular tool for building monitoring
dashboards. Grafana has native support for prometheus and thanks to the 
excellent support for prometheus in Cloudprober itself, it's a breeze to build
Grafana dashboards from Cloudprober's probe results.

To get started with Grafana, follow the Grafana-Prometheus
[integration guide](https://prometheus.io/docs/visualization/grafana/).
